.\" Copyright (c) 2014-2020 by Farsight Security, Inc.
.\"
.\" Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.\" you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\" You may obtain a copy of the License at
.\"
.\"  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.\"
.\" Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.\" distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.\" WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\"
.Dd 2018-01-30
.Dt dnsdbq 1 DNSDB
.Os " "
.Sh NAME
.Nm dnsdbq
.Nd DNSDB query tool
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm dnsdbq
.Op Fl acdfgGhIjmqSsUv468
.Op Fl A Ar timestamp
.Op Fl B Ar timestamp
.Op Fl b Ar bailiwick
.Op Fl D Ar asn_domain
.Op Fl i Ar ip
.Op Fl J Ar input_file
.Op Fl k Ar sort_keys
.Op Fl L Ar output_limit
.Op Fl l Ar query_limit
.Op Fl M Ar max_count
.Op Fl N Ar raw_name
.Op Fl n Ar name
.Op Fl O Ar offset
.Op Fl p Ar output_type
.Op Fl R Ar raw_rrset
.Op Fl r Ar rrset
.Op Fl T Ar transform[,...]
.Op Fl t Ar rrtype
.Op Fl u Ar server_sys
.Op Fl V Ar verb
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm dnsdbq
constructs and issues queries to Passive DNS systems which return
data in the IETF Passive DNS Common Output Format. Farsight Security's
DNSDB is one such system.
.Nm dnsdbq
displays responses in various formats.  It is commonly used as a
production command line interface to such systems.
.Pp
Its default query type is a "lookup" query.  As an option, it can
issue a "summarize" query type.
.Pp
Farsight Security's DNSDB system implements both APIv1 and APIv2 interfaces.
APIv1 is accessed by specifying system "dnsdb."  APIv2 is accessed by
specifying system "dnsdb2".
.Pp
You'll need to get an API key from Farsight to use
.Ic dnsdbq
with DNSDB.
.Pp
Farsight's passive DNS infrastructure performs a complex process
of "bailiwick reconstruction" where an RRset's position within the DNS
hierarchy is approximated. This serves two purposes:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Provide context of the location of a given DNS record within the DNS hierarchy.
.It
Prevent "untrustworthy" records that are a result of intentional or
unintentional cache poisoning attempts from being replicated by downstream
consumers.
.El
.Pp
For example, given the fully qualified domain name
.Ic www.dachshund.example.com ,
valid bailiwicks would be
.Ic dachshund.example.com ,
.Ic example.com ,
or
.Ic com .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Fl a
enables ASINFO/CIDR annotation for IP addresses in A (IPv4 address) RRsets.
Depending on the data source given by
.Fl D ,
the result might be of a least-specific, most-specific, or intermediate route.
.It Fl A Ar timestamp
Specify a backward time fence. Only results seen by the passive DNS
on or after this time will be selected. See also
.Fl c .
See the TIMESTAMP FORMATS section for more information about this.
.It Fl B Ar timestamp
Specify a forward time fence. Only results seen by the passive DNS
sensor network on or before this time will be selected. See also
.Fl c .
See the TIMESTAMP FORMATS section for more information about this.
.It Fl b Ar bailiwick
specify bailiwick (only valid with
.Fl r
queries).
.It Fl c
by default,
.Fl A
and
.Fl B
(separately or together) will select partial overlaps of database tuples and
time search criteria. To match only complete overlaps, add the -c
("completeness") command line option (this is also known as "strict"
mode).
.It Fl D
specify the data source for ASINFO/CIDR annotations, if enabled by
.Fl a .
Default is
.Ic "asn.routeviews.org" ,
but you may wish to try
.Ic "aspath.routeviews.org" .
.It Fl d
enable debug mode.  Repeat for more debug output.
.It Fl f
specify batch lookup mode allowing one or more queries to be performed.
Queries will be read from standard input and are expected to be in
one of the following formats:
.Bl -dash -offset indent
.It
RRset (raw) query:
.Ic rrset/name/NAME[/RRTYPE[/BAILIWICK]]
.It
RRset (raw) query:
.Ic rrset/raw/HEX[/RRTYPE[/BAILIWICK]]
.It
Rdata (name) query:
.Ic rdata/name/NAME[/RRTYPE]
.It
Rdata (IP address) query:
.Ic rdata/ip/ADDR[,PFXLEN]
.It
Rdata (raw) query:
.Ic rdata/raw/HEX[/RRTYPE]
.It
Change query options:
.Ic $OPTIONS {options}
.El
.Pp
Where
.Ic options
:==
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
[-A\ timestamp] [-B\ timestamp] [-c] [-g] [-G]
[-l\ query_limit] [-L\ output_limit] [-O\ offset]
.Ed
.Pp
$OPTIONS alone on a line allows command line options to be changed mid-batch.
If no options are given, the query parameters will be reset to those given
on the command line, if any, or else to defaults.
.Pp
A line starting with a # will be ignored as a comment.
.Pp
Any internal slash (/) or comma (,) characters within the search names
of a batch entry must be URL-encoded (for example, %2F or %2C).
.Pp
For raw queries, the HEX value is an even number of hexadecimal digits
specifying a raw octet string.  The "raw" wire-format encodings are
standardized. The embedding of these in dnstable is documented in the
.Xr dnstable-encoding 5
manual page.
.Pp
In batch lookup mode, each answer will be followed by a -- marker, so that
programmatic users will know when it is safe to send the next lookup, or if
lookups are pipelined, to know when one answer has ended and another begun.
This option cannot be mixed with
.Fl n ,
.Fl r ,
.Fl R ,
or
.Fl i .
See the EXAMPLES section for more information on how to use
.Fl f .
.Pp
If two
.Fl f
options are given, then each answer will also be preceded by a ++ marker
giving the query string (as read from the batch input) in order to identify
each answer when a very large batch input is given, and the -- marker will
include an error/noerror indicator and a short message describing the outcome.
With two
.Fl f
options and also
.Fl m ,
answers can appear in a different order than the batched questions.
.Pp
The ++ and -- markers are not valid JSON, CSV, or DNS (text) format, so
caution is required. (See
.Fl m
option below.)
.It Fl g
return graveled results. Default is to return aggregated results (rocks,
vs. gravel). Gravel is a feature for providing Volume Across Time.
.It Fl G
undo the effect of
.Fl g ,
this returning rocks rather than gravel. (Used in $OPTIONS in batch files.)
.It Fl h
emit usage and quit.
.It Fl I
request information from the API server concerning the API key itself, which
may include rate limit, query quota, query allowance, or privilege levels; the
output format and content is dependent on the server_sys argument (see
.Ic -u
) and upon the
.Fl p
argument.
.Ic -I -p json
prints the raw info.
.Ic -I -p text
prints
the information in a more understandable textual form, including converting
any epoch integer times into UTC formatted times.
.It Fl i Ar ip
specify rdata ip ("right-hand side") query.  The value is one of an
IPv4 address, an IPv6 address, an IPv4 network with prefix length, an
IPv4 address range, or an IPv6 network with prefix length. If a
network lookup is being performed, the delimiter between network
address and prefix length is a single comma (",") character rather
than the usual slash ("/") character to avoid clashing with the HTTP
URI path name separator.  See EXAMPLES section for more information
about separator substitution rules.
.It Fl J Ar input_file
opens input_file and reads newline-separated JSON objects therefrom, in
preference to -f (batch mode) or query mode. This can be used
to reprocess the output from a prior invocation which used
.Fl j
(-p json). Sorting, limits, and time fences will work. Specification of a
domain name, RRtype, Rdata, or offset is not supported at this time.
If input_file is "-" then standard input (stdin) will be read.
.It Fl j
specify newline delimited json output mode.
.It Fl k Ar sort_keys
when sorting with -s or -S, selects one or more comma separated sort keys,
among "first", "last", "duration", "count", "name", and/or "data".
The default order is be "first,last,duration,count,name,data"
(if sorting is requested.)
Names are sorted right to left (by TLD then 2LD etc). Data is sorted either
by name if present, or else by numeric value (e.g., for A and AAAA RRsets.)
Several
.Fl k
options can be given after different
.Fl s
and
.Fl S
options, to sort in ascending order for some keys, descending for others.
.It Fl l Ar query_limit
query for that limit's number of responses. If specified as 0 then the DNSDB
API server will return the maximum limit of results allowed.  If
.Fl l ,
is not specified, then the query will not specify a limit, and the DNSDB API
server may use its default limit.
.It Fl L Ar output_limit
clamps the number of objects per response (under
.Fl [R|r|N|n|i|f] )
or for all responses (under
.Fl [fm|ff|ffm] )
output to
.Ic output_limit .
If unset, and if batch and merge modes have not been selected with the
.Fl f
and
.Fl m
options, then the
.Fl L
output limit defaults to the
.Fl l
limit's value. Otherwise the default is no output limit.
.It Fl M Ar max_count
for the summarize verb, stops summarizing when the count reaches that
max_count, which must be a positive integer.  The resulting total
count may exceed max_count as it will include the entire count from
the last RRset examined.  The default is to not constrain the maximum
count.  The number of RRsets summarized is also limited by the
query_limit.
.It Fl m
used only with
.Fl f ,
this causes multiple (up to ten) API queries to execute in parallel.
In this mode there will be no "--" marker, and the combined output of
all queries is what will be subject to sorting, if any. If two
.Fl f
flags are specified with
.Fl m ,
the output will not be merged, can appear in any order, will be sorted
separately for each response, and will have normal '--' / '++' markers.
(See
.Fl f
option above.)
.It Fl N Ar HEX
specify raw
.Ic rdata
data ("right-hand side") query. HEX is as described above.
.It Fl n Ar name
specify
.Ic rdata
name ("right-hand side") query.  The value is a DNS domain name in
presentation format, or a left-hand (".example.com") or right-hand
("www.example.") wildcard domain name. Note that left-hand wildcard queries
are somewhat more expensive than right-hand wildcard queries.
.It Fl O Ar offset
to offset by #offset the results returned by the query.
This gives you incremental results transfers.
Cannot be negative. The default is 0.
.It Fl p Ar output_type
select output type. Specify:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm text
for presentation output meant to be human-readable. This is the default.
.Cm dns
is a synonym, for compatibility with older programmatic callers.
.It Cm json
for newline delimited JSON output.
.It Cm csv
for comma separated value output. This format is information losing,
since
it cannot express multiple resource records that are in a single RRset.
Instead, each resource record is expressed in a separate line of output.
See the
.Ic DNSDBQ_TIME_FORMAT
environment variable below for controlling how
timestamps are formatted for this option.
.El
.It Fl q
makes the program reticent about warnings.
.It Fl R Ar HEX
specify raw
.Ic rrset
owner data ("left-hand side") query. HEX is as described above.
.It Fl r Ar rrset
specify RRset ("left-hand side") name query.
.It Fl s
sort output in ascending key order. Limits (if any) specified by
.Fl l
and
.Fl L
will be applied before and after sorting, respectively. In batch
mode, the
.Fl f ,
.Fl ff ,
and
.Fl ffm
option sets will cause each batch entry's result to be sorted
independently, whereas with
.Fl fm ,
all outputs will be combined before sorting. This means with
.Fl fm
there will be no output until after the last batch entry has
been processed, due to store and forward by the sort process.
.It Fl S
sort output in descending key order. See discussion for
.Fl s
above.
.It Fl T Ar transform[,...]
specify one or more transforms to be applied to the output:
.Bl -tag -width datefix
.It Cm datefix
always show dates in human readable format (so, not in database format).
This will be the format selected by the DNSDBQ_TIME_FORMAT
environment variable, if set.
.It Cm reverse
show the DNS owner name (rrname) in TLD-first order (so, COM.EXAMPLE
rather than EXAMPLE.COM).
.El
.It Fl t Ar rrtype
specify the resource record type desired.  Default is ANY.
If present, this option should precede any
.Fl R ,
.Fl r ,
.Fl N ,
or
.Fl n
options.  This option is not allowed if the
.Fl i
option is present.  Valid values include those defined in DNS RFCs,
including ANY.  A special-case supported in DNSDB is ANY-DNSSEC, which
matches on DS, RRSIG, NSEC, DNSKEY, NSEC3, NSEC3PARAM, and DLV
resource record types.
.It Fl u Ar server_sys
specifies the syntax of the RESTful URL, default is "dnsdb".
.It Fl V Ar verb
The verb to perform, i.e. the type of query, either "lookup" or
"summarize".  The default is the "lookup" verb.  As an option, you can
specify the "summarize" verb, which gives you an estimate of
result size.  At-a-glance, it provides information on when a given
domain name, IP address or other DNS asset was first-seen and
last-seen by the global sensor network, as well as the total
observation count.
.It Fl U
turns off TLS certificate verification (unsafe).
.It Fl v
report the version of dnsdbq and exit.
.It Fl 4
use to force connecting to the DNSDB server via IPv4.
.It Fl 6
use to force connecting to the DNSDB server via IPv6.
.It Fl 8
Normally dnsdbq requires that
.Fl n
or
.Fl r
arguments are 7-bit ASCII clean.  Non-ASCII values should be queried using PUNYCODE IDN encoding.  This
.Fl 8
option allows using arbitrary 8 bit values.
.El
.Sh "TIMESTAMP FORMATS"
Timestamps may be one of following forms.
.Bl -dash -offset indent
.It
positive unsigned integer : in Unix epoch format.
.It
negative unsigned integer : negative offset in seconds from now.
.It
YYYY-MM-DD [HH:MM:SS] : in absolute form, in UTC time, as DNSDB does its
fencing using UTC time.
.It
%uw%ud%uh%um%us : the relative form with explicit labels (w=weeks, d=days,
h=hours, m=minutes, s=seconds).  Calculates offset
from UTC time, as DNSDB does its fencing using UTC time.
.Pp
.El
When using batch mode with the second or forth cases, using relative
times to now, the value for "now" is set when dnsdbq starts.
.Pp
A few examples of how to use timefencing options.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
# only responses after Aug 22, 2015 (midnight)
$ dnsdbq ... -A 2015-08-22
# only responses before Jan 22, 2013 (midnight)
$ dnsdbq ... -B 2013-01-22
# only responses from 2015 (midnight to midnight)
$ dnsdbq ... -B 2016-01-01 -A 2015-01-01
# only responses after 2015-08-22 14:36:10
$ dnsdbq ... -A "2015-08-22 14:36:10"
# only responses from the last 60 minutes
$ dnsdbq ... -A "-3600"
# only responses after "just now"
$ dnsdbq -f ... -A "-3600"
# batch mode with only responses after "just now", even if feeding inputs
to dnsdbq in batch mode takes hours.
$ date +%s
1485284066
$ dnsdbq ... -A 1485284066
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
A few examples of how to specify IP address information.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
# specify a single IPv4 address
$ dnsdbq ... -i 128.223.32.35
# specify an IPv4 CIDR
$ dnsdbq ... -i 128.223.32.0/24
# specify a range of IPv4 addresses
$ dnsdbq ... -i 128.223.32.0-128.223.32.32
.Ed
.Pp
Perform an RRset query for a single A record for
.Ic farsightsecurity.com .
The output is serialized as JSON and is piped to the
.Ic jq
program (a command-line JSON processor) for pretty printing.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
$ dnsdbq -r farsightsecurity.com/A -l 1 -j -a | jq .
{
  "count": 6350,
  "time_first": 1380123423,
  "time_last": 1427869045,
  "rrname": "farsightsecurity.com.",
  "rrtype": "A",
  "bailiwick": "farsightsecurity.com.",
  "rdata": [
    "66.160.140.81"
  ],
  "dnsdbq-rdata": [
    {
      "asinfo": [ 6939 ],
      "cidr": "66.160.128.0/18",
      "rdata": "66.160.140.81"
    }
  ]
}
.Ed
.Pp
Note the "dnsdbq-rdata" element added due to the use of the
.Fl a
option.
.Pp
Perform a batched operation for a several different
.Ic rrset
and
.Ic rdata
queries. Output is again serialized as JSON and redirected to a file.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
$ cat batch.txt
rrset/name/\*.wikipedia.org
rrset/name/\*.dmoz.org
rrset/raw/0366736902696f00/A
rdata/name/\*.pbs.org
rdata/name/\*.opb.org
rdata/ip/198.35.26.96
rdata/ip/23.21.237.0,24
rdata/raw/0b763d73706631202d616c6c
$ dnsdbq -j -f < batch.txt > batch-output.json
$ head -1 batch-output.json | jq .
{
  "count": 2411,
  "zone_time_first": 1275401003,
  "zone_time_last": 1484841664,
  "rrname": "wikipedia.org.",
  "rrtype": "NS",
  "bailiwick": "org.",
  "rdata": [
    "ns0.wikimedia.org.",
    "ns1.wikimedia.org.",
    "ns2.wikimedia.org."
  ]
}
.Ed
.Sh ASINFO/CIDR LOOKUPS
When the
.Fl a
option is used, every address seen in a response will cause a DNS lookup
under the domain specified by the
.Fl D
option. This stream of DNS queries might be an intolerable information leak
depending on the nature of the underlying research, and it could also lead
to unusably bad performance depending on the placement of your configured
recursive DNS service.
.Pp
For best results, always use an on-server or on-LAN
recursive DNS service, and consider whether to configure that recursive DNS
service to be a "stealth secondary" of the zone denoted by the
.Fl D
option. For the default
.Fl D
value, more information can be found online at
.Ic "http://archive.routeviews.org/dnszones/" .
.Pp
Use of DNS lookups to retrieve ASINFO/CIDR metadata can be extremely fast
and surveillance-free, but some attention must be paid in order to obtain
that outcome. For occasional low-volume use, your current recursive DNS
placement and configuration is probably good enough.
.Pp
Note that while Passive DNS information is historical, the ASINFO/CIDR
annotations made possible using the
.Fl a
and
.Fl D
options are based on current information. Internet routing system
information may have changed since the DNS data was recorded. More
information about this can be found online at
.Ic "https://github.com/dnsdb/dnsdbq/blob/master/README" .
.Sh FILES
.Ic ~/.isc-dnsdb-query.conf ,
.Ic ~/.dnsdb-query.conf ,
.Ic /etc/isc-dnsdb-query.conf ,
or
.Ic /etc/dnsdb-query.conf :
configuration file which should contain the user's apikey and server URL.
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev DNSDB_API_KEY , APIKEY"
.It Ev APIKEY
contains the user's apikey (no default).
.It Ev DNSDB_SERVER
contains the URL of the DNSDB API server (default is https://api.dnsdb.info),
and optionally the URI prefix for the database (default is "/lookup").
.It Ev CIRCL_AUTH , CIRCL_SERVER
enable access to a passive DNS system compatible with the CIRCL.LU system.
.It Ev DNSDBQ_SYSTEM
contains the default value for the
.Ar u
option described above. Can be "dnsdb", "dnsdb2", or "circl". If unset,
.Nm dnsdbq
will probe for any configured system.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev DNSDB_API_KEY , APIKEY"
.It Ev DNSDB_API_KEY , APIKEY
contains the user's apikey. If DNSDB_API_KEY is not present, then APIKEY will
be used. If neither variable is present, the configuration file is consulted.
.It Ev DNSDB_SERVER
contains the URL of the DNSDB API server, and optionally a URI prefix to be
used (default is "/lookup"). If not set, the configuration file is consulted.
.It Ev DNSDBQ_TIME_FORMAT
controls how human readable date times are displayed from the "-p csv"
output format.  If "iso" then ISO8601 (RFC3339) format is used, for
example; "2018-09-06T22:48:00Z".  If "csv" then an Excel CSV
compatible format is used; for example, "2018-09-06 22:48:00".
.El
.Sh "EXIT STATUS"
Success (exit status zero) occurs if a connection could be established
to the back end database server, even if no records matched the search
criteria. Failure (exit status nonzero) occurs if no connection could be
established, perhaps due to a network or service failure, or a configuration
error such as specifying the wrong server hostname.
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr dig 1 ,
.Xr jq 1 ,
.Xr libcurl 3 ,
.Xr dnstable-encoding 5
